---
title: "Walkable City"
featured_image: "images/WalkableCity.jpeg"
description: "10 steps to improve walkability in American cities"
date: 2023-05-29
draft: false
tag: "book"
---

# Walkable City

Walkable City, by Jeff Speck, is one of the latest books that I have read. It has 
taken me around 2 months to finish it (without public transport, my reading
pace gets affected), and I had a good feeling after reading it. It is not
the kind of book that will change your mind or make you stay awake at 3 AM.
But the collection of data, the easy structure of the book, and the good
examples that he gives about America will allow me to discuss why we need
walkable cities with more enthusiasm and knowledge.

## We need walkable cities

I experienced the suburban lifestyle from my 14th birthday to my 18th 
birthday. I did not come back to it until a pandemic turned social 
interactions into a hazard. In between, I lived in the city, though I was
never able to afford a place downtown. And now, I live in a semi-urban
environment where I can afford rent at the same time that I can still move
by bus and bike. For me, the winner keeps being the city. Having a familiar
place to have a morning coffee; a nice pub where to meet your friends; being
able to walk back home, after a few beers, without any driving; finding new things to do downtown;
and sleeping without remorses about the huge amounts of CO2 that are being
generated by your lifestyle.

The last point might is especially important. We have duplicated the
concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere. And still, we do not have any realistic
plan to halt the emissions. When influential people are asked about it, they usually
answer about green energy, electric cars or even nuclear fusion. But behind
these answers, there is nothing more than the idea of **preserving our
lifestyle at all costs**.

And honestly, I don't understand why we need to kill the planet to save the boring
and bland lifestyle of the suburbs.

## A 10 steps guide for "walkability"

The book starts by trying to convince the reader about why walkable cities 
are the winners of the future. But, as I find in this kind of book, this is 
not usually necessary, because if you are reading this book, is very likely 
that your mind is already set. Then, the book becomes a 10 steps guide to
generate walkable cities. Each chapter will deal with some of the aspects
that you need to care about to make cities walkable. Some of them are somehow
obvious: a 10 lanes street does not invite people to cross it. But some others
might be a little bit counterintuitive. For instance, many people believe that
cities need many big parks that *breathe* for the city. However, the author argues
that too many parks make the city too sparse and boring. Walkable cities
are also not just about having a compact city with narrow streets. They need to
provide an exciting urban landscape that makes walking not just a way of
commuting but a way of living.

## What I missed

Even though I've enjoyed the book, I was a little bit upset about the lack of 
content related to some of the processes that are affecting people the most
in European and American cities, like *gentrification* and *turistification*. In the
end, my feeling is that the book is rather a guide to turn a city more interesting
than other cities than a manual for revolutionary urbanism.  In many chapters,
I get the feeling that the real target of walkability, as it is understood here,
is to bring rich *hipsters* that will make urban neighborhoods too expensive
for their previous owners. And it could be even worse with tourists. 


An interesting example in this line is the transformation of Barcelona. Home of 
a deeply transformative (and sometimes negative) process starting around the Olympic
games of 1992, it is a great example of gentrification and touristification. 
During the later years, Barcelona has introduced one of the major changes and 
most exciting changes in urban structure: the super-islands, whole blocks with 
no inner traffic. However, at the same time that I was excited about this change, 
it seems that some people living there were not that excited about it. 
[According to some neighbors](https://elpais.com/espana/catalunya/2023-04-17/no-se-puede-vivir-de-alquiler-en-la-superilla-aqui-no-quedara-nadie.html), 
these beautiful projects would bring wealthier neighbors, as digital 
nomads, that would be able to pay higher rent and shift the neighbors. This kind
of negative effect might explain why some people have mistunderstood the
*15-minute-city concept* so badly.

## Conclusion

In conclusion, I find this book an interesting guide, especially in the context of
American cities. It has not changed my perspective and I still need to find another 
book about gentrification. But it was a pleasure to read.

**PD**: There is a great podcast chapter of [*Tech Won't Save Us*](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/tech-wont-save-us/id1507621076?i=1000612595594) that
covers the topic of how cities are being designed to attract tech workers, ignoring other needs.
